# FOAM Build
**Pom-O-Matic**
Solve your Build troubles with Pom-O-Matic!

The FOAM build is a **node** tool which executes Javascript methods (**Tasks**) against Project Object Model (**POM**)(or a more lighthearted acronym expansion: **Pom-O-Matic**) files.

The build manages **options** and **tasks**:

- options - provide build specific command line arguments that manipulate flags or set environment variables to impact the selection and operation of **tasks**.
- tasks - methods which act against the source code to generate an application.

**POMs** are JSON files which identify source code, application configuration, and build instructions. They are hierarchical and can exist at any level of a code repository.

There are two types of POMs

1. **Tooling** - poms which configure the Build environment itself.
    - **options** and **tasks** add support for build specific command line options and methods to process the source code.
    - *For example*, **JavaTooling** adds **options** to allow the configuration of the Java target version, and provide command line arguments to control creating a JAR file or start the JVM with JDPA enabled.  And adds **tasks** for building and starting from JAR file locally or building a TAR file for remote deployment.
    - Multiple *Tooling* POMs can define the same task name; All will be executed in the order encountered during tooling setup.
    - The build defaults to *Tooling* **task** `all` when no tasks are specified on the command line. (see `JavaTooling`)
1. **Build** - poms which declare build inputs.
    * Such as code and deployment configuration to include.
    * *For example*, specifying the models to generate Java from and specifying the configuration to include in a JAR file.

There are **three** distinct build **phases**:

1. **Tooling** - the build loads Tooling POMs which add **options** for command line control, and build **tasks** specific to the type of code generation, compilation, and deployment to be supported.
2. **Environment and Registration** - the build processes the Build POMs to: 
    1. set environment variable values for **options** added during the Tooling phase 
        * (i.e., Java target release = 21)
    2. register Build POM **tasks** to be run when same-named Tooling **tasks** are run
        * (i.e., **buildJavaOpts** JAVA_OPTS=-Dxyz before the JVM is started).
    ```
    foam.POM({
      ...
      envs: {
        appName: 'foam',
      },
      ...
      tasks: [
        function javacParameters() {
          JAVA_RELEASE = 21;
        },
        function buildJavaOpts() {
          JAVA_OPTS += `` -DGO_HOME=${APP_HOME}``;
        }
    ```
1. **Task** - the build processes the command line arguments, for options added during the Tooling phase, and prepares a set of **tasks** which are then executed.  The **tasks** themselves, act on the Build POMs.

## Command Line Arguments

Three input styles are supported

- single character (-h) - for a very few tasks.
- GNU getopt word style (--help) plus optional arguments.
- word style without the leading --, again with optional arguments.

The *word style* arguments can be listed individually or comma seperated. 
- *For example* --cleanAll,all

## Usage

Build examples for each Tooling feature is available with task `usage`

    $ node foam3/tools/build.js --usage

## Help on Help

Build help is generated by the **help** option and can be invoked in a number of ways:

- `$ node foam3/tools/build.js --help`
- `$ node foam3/tools/build.js -h`
- `$ node foam3/tools/build.js -?`

Help output is broken in three sections: options, tasks, environment variables (envs). Help can display just one of the sections by passing an argument to help.

For example, the following will only output the environment variables.

    $ node foam3/tools/build.js --help:envs

Help can also output the usage or information of a single option, task, or environment variable.

    $ node foam3/tools/build.js --help:topic

For example, the following will only output usage of **help** itself

    $ node foam3/tools/build.js --help:help

Help will output partial matches when an exact match for the help topic is not found.

## Troubleshooting

Option **--show-envs** will cause the build to output the final value of all **options** at the point of exit on error, or just before start CORE.

# POMs (*Incomplete*)

POMs are hierarchical and a POM is responsible for the files in it's directory and child directories which themselves do not contain a POM.

## POM structure
TODO

## Build POM Fields

- name - a non-unique identifier that distinguishes the POM in it's local scope. Used when reporting POM issues.  Also used to set APP_NAME. A different APP_NAME can be specified in **envs**.
```
  foam.POM({
    name: 'foam',
    ...
```
- exclude - directories under this POM which should not be processed if they do not contain a POM.
- envs - map of key-values pairs to set build environment variables or options.
```
  foam.POM({
    name: 'foam-full',
    ...
    envs: {
      appName: 'foam'
    },
```
- licenses - source code licenses which applies to the source managed by this POM.
- version - major[-minor-revision] string used to distinguish a build.  The version is also inserted into the build and available from within.  Used in jar file naming, and also for journal versioning. 
```
  foam.POM({
    ...
    version: '1.0.0',
```
- projects -  (and flags  -   test)
- files -
- javaFiles -
- journalFiles - 
- flowDocFiles - (FUTURE) 
- tasks - (project defined tasks)
- copy - (build provided tasks)
- Tooling specific - java, javaDependencies, javaFiles (above)

### Creating a Build POM Tasks
TODO

## Tooling POM Fields

- name - a non-unique identifier that distinguishes the POM in it's local scope. Used when reporting POM issues.
- envs - environment variables that are internal to the tooling itself. *For example* a calculated value that many tasks share, or that one task sets-up for another.
- options - defines a property whose value can be manipulated to impact a **task**.
- tasks - defines a method which acts against the repository. 

# Project specific Tooling

The build looks for tooling poms in:

- `tools/`
- `foam3/tools/`

For example, **Custom** tooling located in tools/CustomTooling.pom can be added into the build with: 

    -T+Custom

*NOTE* The tooling directive `-T` must proceed all other build arguments.

## Creating a POM Environment Variable
TODO

## Creating a POM Option
TODO

## Creating a POM Tasks
TODO

# Test Cases and Benchmarks

Option **--flags:test** will include all source and configuration flagged as `test` to allow using test and benchmark logic form a normally built application.

# Options and Tasks of interest

- **--nop:option** - The No-Op option takes a comman seperated list of task names not to execute. For example if you are dealing with pure .java files, then issuing --nop:genJS will speed your build times.

# Additional Tooling

- **Project** tooling provides tasks for creating a new FOAM based project, complete with an example Model and Test case.  The task will create the default directory layout along with required poms, and initial journal configuration for logging in and mananging the new Model.
    ```
  ./build.sh -T+setup/Project --appName:example --package:com.foamdev --adminPassword:badpassword --genJava,createProject
  # then build with
  ./build.sh deployment/demo/run.sh
  # login with demo user - username: demo, password: demopassword
  # or admin user - username: admin, password: badpassword
  #
  # Run the test cases with
  ./build.sh --server-tests:ExampleTest
    ```
- **RemoteInstall** tooling provide tasks to install a release on a remote instance.
    - see `doc/guides/Deployment.md`
    - After building with task **tar** (-k), re-run the build with RemoteInstall tooling to upload and install the tarball on a remote host.
    ```
  # build tar ball
  ./build.sh -ckJhttps

  # deploy to remote host
  ./build.sh -TStandard,RemoteInstall,Java --user:foam user-id:3636 --backup:false --remote-hostname:moosehead
    ```
- **ESLint** Linting support
    - see `eslint.md`
    ```
    # Run check on default src/ directory:
    ./build.sh -TESLint

    # see ussage with
    ./build.sh -TESLint --usage
    ```
